[2.9.0] add external cloud provider docs for azure (#1369)
rancher/rancher-docs: docs/how-to-guides/new-user-guides/kubernetes-clusters-in-rancher-setup/set-up-cloud-providers/azure.md

  <link rel="canonical" href="https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/how-to-guides/new-user-guides/kubernetes-clusters-in-rancher-setup/set-up-cloud-providers/azure"/>
</head>

:::note Important:

In Kubernetes 1.30 and later, you must use an out-of-tree Azure cloud provider. In-tree cloud providers have been deprecated. The Azure cloud provider has been removed completely, and won't work after an upgrade to Kubernetes 1.30. The steps listed below are still required to set up an Azure cloud provider. You can [set up an out-of-tree cloud provider](#using-the-out-of-tree-azure-cloud-provider) after completing the prerequisites for Azure cloud provider.

You can also [migrate from an in-tree to an out-of-tree Azure cloud provider](../migrate-to-an-out-of-tree-cloud-provider/migrate-to-out-of-tree-azure.md) on Kubernetes 1.29 and earlier. All existing clusters must migrate prior to upgrading to v1.30 in order to stay functional.

> Starting with Kubernetes 1.29, you must disable the `DisableCloudProviders` and `DisableKubeletCloudCredentialProvider` to use the in-tree Azure cloud provider. You can do this by setting `feature-gates=DisableCloudProviders=false` as an additional argument for the cluster's Kubelet, Controller Manager, and API Server in the advanced cluster configuration. Additionally, set `DisableKubeletCloudCredentialProvider=false` in the Kubelet's arguments to enable in-tree functionality for authenticating to Azure container registries for image pull credentials.

Reviewer: Since there seems to be delays in releasing the removal, is this version number verified?

Author: Yeah, the workaround is valid for 1.29 clusters but not for 1.30.

    </details>

3. Under the **Cluster Configuration > Advanced** section, click **Add** under **Additional Controller Manager Args** and add this flag: `--configure-cloud-routes=false`

4. Click the **Create** button to submit the form and create the cluster.

## Cloud Provider Configuration

Rancher will automatically create a new Network Security Group, Resource Group, Availability Set, Subnet, and Virtual Network. If you already have some or all of these created, you will need to specify them before creating the cluster. You can check RKE1 Node Templates for or RKE2 Machine Pools to see more of these automatically generated names and update them if necessary.

> **Refer to the full list of configuration options in the [upstream docs](https://cloud-provider-azure.sigs.k8s.io/install/configs/).**

Author: @martyav I wanted to keep in this in bold for emphasis, is there any other way you'd prefer to highlight this instead of `**...**`

> **Refer to the full list of configuration options in the [upstream docs](https://cloud-provider-azure.sigs.k8s.io/install/configs/).**

Reviewer: We use bold when we refer to elements in the UI. If you want to highlight something important, we generally use admonitions:

```
:::note

Content

:::
```

:::

Azure cloud provider supports reading the cloud config from Kubernetes secrets. The secret is a serialized version of azure.json file. When the secret is changed, the cloud controller manager will re-constructing itself without restarting the pod. It is recommended for the helm chart to read the Cloud Provider Config from secret.

Note that the chart reads the Cloud Provider Config from a given secret name in the `kube-system` namespace. Since Azure cloud provider would read Kubernetes secrets, RBAC also needs to be configured. An example secret for the Cloud Provider Config is shown below, modify it as needed and create the secret.

  ```yaml
# azure-cloud-config.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: azure-cloud-config
  namespace: kube-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  cloud-config: |-
    {
      "cloud": "AzurePublicCloud",
      "tenantId": "<tenant-id>",
      "subscriptionId": "<subscription-id>",
      "aadClientId": "<client-id>",
      "aadClientSecret": "<tenant-id>",

>       "resourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",

Reviewer 2: Many of the example values use your initials as a suffix, should we update that to something else so it's obvious to users that it's not something they copy and paste as-is?

Author: Yeah that was my intention but good point, all of our documentation uses simply `docker-machine` so I'll update it everywhere to just that.

      "location": "westus",
      "subnetName": "docker-machine-ks",  

>       "securityGroupName": "rancher-managed-kqmtsjgJ",

Reviewer 3: securityGroupName should be same everywhere while creating a cluster. User has to provider securityGroupName at least 3 times while creating a cluster. Could you please mention that in documentation?

Author: @vivek-shilimkar Did you have to provide the securityGroupName for the worker machine pool as well?

Reviewer 3: Yes, as per the available [guide](https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/how-to-guides/new-user-guides/kubernetes-clusters-in-rancher-setup/set-up-cloud-providers/azure#rke2-cluster-set-up-in-rancher) the Network Security Group should be same for all the pools and cloud provider configuration. If there is miss match, user gets an error that is similar to - `Security group not found`.

      "securityGroupResourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",
      "vnetName": "docker-machine-ks-vnet",
      "vnetResourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",
      "primaryAvailabilitySetName": "docker-machine-ks",  
      "routeTableResourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",
      "cloudProviderBackoff": false,
      "useManagedIdentityExtension": false,
      "useInstanceMetadata": true,
      "loadBalancerSku": "standard",
      "excludeMasterFromStandardLB": false,
    }
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/cluster-service: "true"
  name: system:azure-cloud-provider-secret-getter
rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
resources: ["secrets"]
resourceNames: ["azure-cloud-config"]
verbs:
  - get
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/cluster-service: "true"
  name: system:azure-cloud-provider-secret-getter
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: system:azure-cloud-provider-secret-getter
  subjects:
    - kind: ServiceAccount
      name: azure-cloud-config
      namespace: kube-system
   ``` 

> ## Using the out-of-tree Azure cloud provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the Out-of-tree Azure Cloud Provider
```

<Tabs groupId="k8s-distro">
<TabItem value="RKE2">

> 1. Choose **External** from the Cloud Provider drop-down in the **Cluster Configuration** section. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select **External** from the **Cloud Provider** drop-down in the **Cluster Configuration** section. 
```

> 2. - Prepare the Cloud Provider Configuration to set for the Cloud Provider Config in the next step. Note that Rancher will automatically create a new Network Security Group, Resource Group, Availability Set, Subnet, and Virtual Network. If you already have some or all of these created, you will need to specify them before creating the cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Prepare the Cloud Provider Configuration to set it in the next step. Note that Rancher automatically creates a new Network Security Group, Resource Group, Availability Set, Subnet, and Virtual Network. If you already have some or all of these created, you must specify them before creating the cluster. 
```

>    - You can click on "Show Advanced" to see more of these automatically generated names and update them if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Show Advanced** to view or edit these automatically generated names.
```

>    necessary. Your Cloud Provider Configuration **must** match the fields in the Machine Pools section. If you have multiple pools, they must all use the same Resource Group, Availability Set, Subnet, Virtual Network, and Network Security Group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your Cloud Provider Configuration must match the fields in the **Machine Pools** section. If you have multiple pools, they must all use the same Resource Group, Availability Set, Subnet, Virtual Network, and Network Security Group.
```

3. Under the **Cluster Configuration > Add-on Config** section, specify the `cloud-provider-azure` Helm chart in **Additional Manifest**. 

> Note that the chart reads the Cloud Provider Config from secret in `kube-system` namespace. An example secret for the Cloud Provider Config is shown below, modify it as needed. Please refer to the full list of configuration options in the [upstream docs](https://cloud-provider-azure.sigs.k8s.io/install/configs/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the chart reads the Cloud Provider Config from the secret in the `kube-system` namespace. An example secret for the Cloud Provider Config is shown below. Modify it as needed. Refer to the full list of configuration options in the [upstream Azure docs](https://cloud-provider-azure.sigs.k8s.io/install/configs/).
```

Reviewer 2: The suggested change has: `in the [upstream Azure docs]`, but the linked docs are provided by Kubernetes, not Azure.

      "securityGroupResourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",
      "vnetName": "docker-machine-ks-vnet",
      "vnetResourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",
      "primaryAvailabilitySetName": "docker-machine-ks",  
      "routeTableResourceGroup": "docker-machine-ks",
      "cloudProviderBackoff": false,
      "useManagedIdentityExtension": false,
      "useInstanceMetadata": true,
      "loadBalancerSku": "standard",
      "excludeMasterFromStandardLB": false,
    }
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/cluster-service: "true"
  name: system:azure-cloud-provider-secret-getter
rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
resources: ["secrets"]
resourceNames: ["azure-cloud-config"]
verbs:
  - get
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  labels:
    kubernetes.io/cluster-service: "true"
  name: system:azure-cloud-provider-secret-getter
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: system:azure-cloud-provider-secret-getter
  subjects:
    - kind: ServiceAccount
      name: azure-cloud-config
      namespace: kube-system
  ```

> 4. Click the **Create** button to submit the form and create the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Click **Create** to submit the form and create the cluster.
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="RKE1">

> 1. Choose "External" from the Cloud Provider drop-down in the **Cluster Options** section. This sets `--cloud-provider=external` for Kubernetes components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Choose **External** from the **Cloud Provider** drop-down in the **Cluster Options** section. This sets `--cloud-provider=external` for Kubernetes components.
```

> 2. Install the `cloud-provider-azure` chart after the cluster finishes provisioning. Note that the cluster isn't successfully provisioned and nodes are still in an `uninitialized` state until you deploy the cloud controller manager. This can be done [manually using CLI](#helm-chart-installation-from-cli), or via [Helm charts in UI](#helm-chart-installation-from-ui). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Install the `cloud-provider-azure` chart after the cluster finishes provisioning. Note that the cluster is not successfully provisioned and nodes are still in an `uninitialized` state until you deploy the cloud controller manager. This can be done [manually using CLI](#helm-chart-installation-from-cli), or via [Helm charts in UI](#helm-chart-installation-from-ui). 
```

> Refer to the official Azure upstream documentation for the [cloud provider](https://cloud-provider-azure.sigs.k8s.io/install/azure-ccm/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [official Azure upstream documentation](https://cloud-provider-azure.sigs.k8s.io/install/azure-ccm/) for more details on deploying the Cloud Controller Manager.
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Helm Chart Installation from CLI

> Official upstream docs for [Helm chart installation](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws/tree/master/charts/aws-cloud-controller-manager) can be found on Github.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Official upstream docs for [Helm chart installation](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cloud-provider-azure/tree/master/helm/cloud-provider-azure) can be found on Github.
```

Not sure if the link I suggested is correct, but the current one is for AWS.

```

3. Create a `values.yaml` file with the following contents to override the default `values.yaml`:

<Tabs groupId="k8s-distro">
<TabItem value="RKE2">

```yaml
# values.yaml
infra:
  clusterName: <cluster-name>
cloudControllerManager:
  cloudConfigSecretName: azure-cloud-config
  cloudConfig: null
  clusterCIDR: null
  enableDynamicReloading: 'true'
  configureCloudRoutes: 'false'
  allocateNodeCidrs: 'false'
  caCertDir: /etc/ssl
  enabled: true
  replicas: 1
  hostNetworking: true
  nodeSelector:
    node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: 'true'
  tolerations:
    - effect: NoSchedule
      key: node-role.kubernetes.io/master
    - effect: NoSchedule
      key: node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane
      value: 'true'
    - effect: NoSchedule
      key: node.cloudprovider.kubernetes.io/uninitialized
      value: 'true'
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="RKE">

```yaml
# values.yaml
cloudControllerManager:
  cloudConfigSecretName: azure-cloud-config
  cloudConfig: null
  clusterCIDR: null  
  enableDynamicReloading: 'true'
  configureCloudRoutes: 'false'
  allocateNodeCidrs: 'false'
  caCertDir: /etc/ssl
  enabled: true
  replicas: 1
  hostNetworking: true
  nodeSelector:

>     node-role.kubernetes.io/controlplane: 'true'

Reviewer 3: ```
nodeSelector:
  node-role.kubernetes.io/controlplane: 'true'
```
results in failure to deploy `cloud-controller-manager` pod. After changing it to `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: 'true'` the pod gets deployed successfully.

Author: Synced up with @vivek-shilimkar offline, we do not need to update the label as RKE1 clusters label nodes as `node-role.kubernetes.io/controlplane: 'true'`. But since helm CLI adds the default `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: ''` anyway, the pods end up not getting deployed. To fix this, we need to set this key as `null` in values.yaml. I have updated the docs to reflect the workaround.

```shell
helm upgrade --install cloud-provider-azure azure-cloud-controller-manager/cloud-provider-azure -n kube-system --values values.yaml
```

Verify that the Helm chart installed successfully:

```shell
helm status cloud-provider-azure -n kube-system
```

5. (Optional) Verify that the cloud controller manager update succeeded:

```shell
kubectl rollout status deployment -n kube-system cloud-controller-manager
kubectl rollout status daemonset -n kube-system cloud-node-manager
```

6. The cloud provider is responsible for setting the ProviderID of the node. Check if all nodes are initialized with the ProviderID:

```shell
kubectl describe nodes | grep "ProviderID"
```

### Helm Chart Installation from UI

1. Click **☰**, then select the name of the cluster from the left navigation.

2. Select **Apps** > **Repositories**.

3. Click the **Create** button.

4. Enter `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/cloud-provider-azure/master/helm/repo` in the **Index URL** field.

5. Select **Apps** > **Charts** from the left navigation and install **cloud-provider-azure** chart.

6. Select the namespace, `kube-system`, and enable **Customize Helm options before install**.

> 7. Replace `cloudConfig: /etc/kubernetes/azure.json` to read from Cloud Config Secret and enable dynamic reloading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Replace `cloudConfig: /etc/kubernetes/azure.json` to read from the Cloud Config Secret and enable dynamic reloading:
```

```yaml
  cloudConfigSecretName: azure-cloud-config
  enableDynamicReloading: 'true'
```

8. Update the following fields as required:

```yaml 
  allocateNodeCidrs: 'false'
  configureCloudRoutes: 'false'
  clusterCIDR: null
```

<Tabs groupId="k8s-distro">
<TabItem value="RKE2">

> 9. Rancher-provisioned RKE2 nodes have selector `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: 'true'`. Update the nodeSelector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Rancher-provisioned RKE2 nodes have the selector `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane` set to `true`. Update the nodeSelector:
```

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: 'true'
```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="RKE">

10. Rancher-provisioned RKE nodes are tainted `node-role.kubernetes.io/controlplane`. Update tolerations and the nodeSelector:

```yaml
tolerations:
  - effect: NoSchedule
    key: node.cloudprovider.kubernetes.io/uninitialized
    value: 'true'
  - effect: NoSchedule
    value: 'true'
    key: node-role.kubernetes.io/controlplane
```

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  node-role.kubernetes.io/controlplane: 'true'
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> 11. Install the chart and confirm that the cloud controller and cloud node manager deploy successfully:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11. Install the chart and confirm that the cloud controller and cloud node manager deployed successfully:
```
